Reducing both our individual carbon footprint and the “number of feet” through culturally-sensitive programming is a cost effective strategy to mitigate climate change. Through our Family Planning program, we focus on increasing access to voluntary family planning in emerging economies and in the Global North.

We are in a learning phase at our foundation, and we view our grantees as guides who will show us what approaches to girls’ and women’s reproductive care and education work best in their communities. Our current portfolio of projects represent for-profit, social impact investing and philanthropic investing. We have focused on working with grantees who are willing to teach us about the challenges of program implementation--what works and what doesn’t--so that we can develop as a sympathetic, collaborative partner.

For the 2019-2020 grant cycle, Preston-Werner Ventures is seeking to fund family planning-focused projects, especially those involving community health workers. We also will consider proposals to provide financial support for grassroots NGOs and internationally-oriented nonprofits that inform public discourse about the public health need for family planning, as well as activist organizations that build movements and bolster government support for implementation of family planning programming.

In the future, we hope to shift toward working at the implementation point between A) proven models that provide family planning access and B) government adoption, financing, and scaling of those models. We will seek to build partnerships with local and national governments who already demonstrate a commitment to the community health workers model, but who need help with initial implementation. We will offer grants that bring best-practice models for community health workers, including emphasis on women’s reproductive health, to governments. We believe that governments should provide quality primary and preventative healthcare for their citizens, including last-mile health.

As this journey toward government-funded healthcare continues, smaller NGOs are necessary to provide the intermediary care. PWVs will continue to provide grants to support their current work.
